= Cuts - Cut-based AOP for Ruby

== Description

Cuts is an expiremental pure-Ruby implimentation of cut-base AOP.
Cuts are a failry low-level system, so implementing them in pure-Ruby is no
simple accomplishment, even for a language as reflective and metaprogrammable as Ruby.


== History

Cuts started it's life as a discussion about AOP on Ruby-talk, which led to 
a in-depth discussion between Trans and Peter Vanbroekhoven. The outcome of those talks
were three projects. <a href="http://suby.rubyforge.org">Suby</a> an early expiremental
branch of Ruby; the RCRFoundry, a section of the Ruby Garden Wiki dedicated to jointly
developing RCRs; and the <a href="rcr.html">Cut-based AOP RCR</a>. 
The RCR of course, ultimately led to this project, as well as an expiremental Ruby 1.8.3
core implementation (see the Suby homepage). We continue to touch up the
<a href="rcr.html">RCR</a> but on the whole it is now complete.</p>

Please read <a href="rcr.html">Cut-based AOP for Ruby RCR</a>.

This Cuts library comes by way of <a href="http://facets.rubyforge.org">Ruby Facets</a>, where the implementation
was orginally housed. Becuase of it's expiremental nature, it was deemd best to move it into it's own
project as part of the ongoing work to make Facets a rock solid library. Despite being expiremental, this 
implementation does pass it's unit test. However, it has had litte trial in integrated tests. It will be
interesting to see if this library, as it matures, can prove robust enough for production use. In either
case, clearly it would be preferable to have a Ruby-core implementation instead, but that potential
is completely in other persons hands.</p>


== Usage

Here is a quick and dirty example:

  require 'cuts'

  class C
    def f ; "f" ; end
  end

  cut :G < C do
    def f; '<'+super+'>' ; end
  end

  c = C.new

  c.f  #=> "&lt;f&gt;"


For detailed usage documentation, please refer to the <a href="docs/api/index.html">API Docs</a>.


== Install

Install via RubyGems:

  $ gem install cuts


== Special Thanks

Special thanks to Peter Van Broekhoven. The man is a genius!


== Legal

(Apache 2.0 License)

Cuts, Copyright &#x00A9; 2007 Thomas Sawyer & Peter Van Broekhoven

See NOTICE.rdoc and APACHE2.txt file for details.
